
 A Brief Description of Space Invaders
======================================

 Space Invaders is a Midway arcade machine from 1978 (if my sources of
information are correct ;).  I think everyone knows this game.  It's one of
the first classical arcade machines like Galaga, Pacman, or Pong are. I'm
sure I never played with the arcade machine, but I never was an arcade
machine player so ... :o.  Now I think about it I see SI is the same age as
my brother, so when it was released I was pretty young, perhaps I could have
played with it in a museum. :) Oh, but like any other young people I have
played other SI versions on a lot of different machines (my first version
was in a PC).  For sure, I'm not very good at it and I like Galaga or
Galaxian more, but what does it matter? ;).  Okay, enough talk without
sense, let's do some work.

 Space Invaders is a very simple machine (like all other machines from that
age).  It's built around an i8080A CPU (Intel) or another compatible CPU
from another manufacturer (in the schematics from Spies, for example, it's a
TI, Texas Instruments, CPU).  It is, perhaps, the first useful and cheap CPU
(as a microCPU) released for commercial use (perhaps US army had others for
its missiles... I don't know :).  In this case I think it is a 2Mhz CPU.  It
has 8Kb ROM (distributed in various ICs, this machine is really old) and 8Kb
RAM (mainly video memory, but also a bit of it is work RAM).  To be exact it
is, 8kb i8kSRAM in 8 pieces and 8kb i16kEPROM in 4 pieces.  Ops, now I take
a look to the schematics I see 16 RAM ICs, umm, perhaps the document I'm
using is wrong. Does anyone wants to discover the mystery?  But it's still
true: 8Kb ROM and 8Kb RAM.  The video memory is 7 Kb and the work memory is
1 Kb. The video and sound hardware are very simple.  The video hardware is a
monochrome display so each bit of the memory stores the value of one pixel
(on/off).  The display and VRAM are 224x256.  The machine also uses two
transparent coloured (red and green) pieces of paper in the top and the
bottom of the screen.  That makes the screen more wonderful, doesn't it? ;)
It didn't require extra expensive hardware ...  Sound effects are produced
with analogue circuits so it will be hard to emulate them, so we will use
samples instead.  As input devices, it has a 2way stick and one button (for
each player). It also has a player 1 start button, player 2 start button,
coin switch and TILT switch (?).  So this is what we will have to emulate.

 Now I will talk a bit about the 8080 CPU.  It's an old Intel CPU released
... ops I didn't find when it was released, anyone knows about it? Last 70s
for sure.  It's an enhancement of the 8008 Intel CPU (the second microCPU I
think, first was 4004).  It was a very popular CPU for many years and the
first to be vastly used.  There were a lot of versions from different
manufacturers (AMD, TI, NEC, NS, SIGNETICS).  Later some other compatible
but extended CPUs were released as the 8085 and the well known Z80 (Zilog)
which is, in my thoughts, the most impressive and beautiful 8-bit CPU ever
made, and it is still alive :).  It's an 8-bit CPU with eight 8-bit
registers (I'm counting also the flag register F): A, B, C, D, E, H, L and
F.  They can be also accessed in pairs as 16-bit registers (AF, BC, DE and
HL).  It also has a SP (stack pointer register) and a PC (Program Counter
Register), both of which are 16 bit registers.  Register A is the main
accumulator register; many operations are performed with that register as
source/target register.  Register B, C, D, E, BC, DE are multipurpose
registers, mainly used as accumulators also. Register HL is used for
indirect memory addressing.  The 8080 has three types of memory addressing,
immediate, direct and indirect (using HL).  If we also count branch
instructions we have relative to PC addressing.  The memory space is 16 bits
 long, 2^16 = 65535 bytes or 64Kbytes.  It has also a separated Input/Output
space with 256 ports.

 Enough today.  I think I talk too much, don't you? ;)

 Comments, mistakes you have found, whatever...

 Victor Moya




